Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Many who served bravely in Vietnam were there for a year, and if they were among the fortunate to come home, they went about their lives.
Well, Jim Hester of Bryan was an Army lifer, interrupted by four years that he spent in the Air Force.
And speaking of numbers, Lieutenant Colonel Jim Hester served one tour in Germany, then took three tours of Vietnam, served in the Army and the Air Force, was a medic, was a nurse.
He was wounded three times and earned two Purple Hearts, one Silver Star, one Bronze Star, one Army Combination Medal for Valor.
He retired twice, the second time after 9-11 when he up-trained troops to serve in the War on Terror.
His 35 years of service, truly remarkable.
What an honor it is to have you here, Lieutenant Colonel Hester.
You grew up in Corpus Christi, which everybody knows is a Navy town, but you kind of got hooked on tanks and went off to Germany.
Talk about quickly the years before you went to Vietnam and sort of how you prepared for that.
Well, I was in the Cuban crisis.
I was in junior high, and one day all these armored vehicles started coming down the pavement, going out to Padre Island.
And that's the first time I'd really ever seen any military vehicles up close other than Navy.
When they came back after it stood down, Cuban crisis did, we took a tour.
They stopped and let us play on the tanks, and then I was hooked.
And so when I got out of school in 1965, you either were drafted or you joined.
My stepfather had been a sergeant in Patton's Army during World War II, and so he kind of steered me into the Army.
My father was actually a Marine, but I decided I didn't want to float on boats, so I kind of went the Army way.
And then Vietnam in what, 66, 67, I guess was the first time that you were in country for a shorter tour.
Talk about that and why you were there.
I had finished my medical training, medic training in the latter part of 66 and was assigned back to Fort Knox in a overhaul and repair maintenance battalion.
They were the ones that converted all the tanks and so forth and major repairs.
We went on a TDY or temporary tour over to Vietnam.
So at that time, armor was really influxing the country.
And they were having some problems with the diesel engines in the tanks due to the weather, dust, and so forth.
And they were going to convert them back into gasoline engines.
And so being one of the medics in the battalion, I went over with this task force over to ready the tanks or convert them, whatever they needed to do with them.
which lasted, we left in February and got back about June of 1967.
Now you were assigned, you were 11th Armored Cav.
Describe that unit.
Well, 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment, or Black Horse, had actually, I knew them when they were in Fuldegap in Germany in 65.
They, I think, transitioned over to Vietnam around 1966, somewhere in there.
By hook or crook, when we went into the maintenance depot, they were the first ones that were going to be receiving the upgrade on the tanks.
And so when we got out to Black Horse, 11th Cav, which was in a place called Swanlock, about 60 clicks or so from Saigon, that's where I got actually my first introduction to Black Horse, or the 11th Army Cavalry Regiment.
Indeed.
Let's fast forward here because you did so much in Vietnam.
You were a medic.
But that involved a little bit of everything from typing to clerking, to driving Jeeps, to actually being a medic also.
You were pretty much a jack of all trades.
Well, in those days, you kind of had more than one hat.
I was one of the only two people in the company that, or battalion actually, that could type other than the company clerk.
And we put band-aids on and fixed the alleys.
And we also, I was a training NCO.
We taught them how to make sure they were
eligible to take care of the equipment on the tanks and what we had and kind of get them indoctrinated to the country and what they were getting into.
Started your second tour of Vietnam, I believe in January of 68.
The Tet Offensive started soon after that.
Third Squadron M Company and you had a somewhat of a famous name for your brigade commander.
Well, our brigade commander was Colonel George Patton Jr.
He came in about midway on my tour there and he was
was quite an individual, very gun-ho.
He was a no-nonsense commander, and he wanted to make sure that everybody got what was coming to him, and he took care of business.
Indeed.
He was somewhat flamboyant like his dad, right?
Yes, sir.
He was a little flamboyant.
He was.
He did his thing, but everybody knew who he was, and everybody respected him.
11th Cav was a pretty famous group.
The Viet Cong didn't think much of them.
No, sir.
During Tet, the 11th Cav, when they got in there, they actually were running Saigon, the Cambodian border up in there.
And when they encountered the Viet Cong, actually they were very triumphant, and they found them being what they call fierce fighters.
And for several months, even after I got there, the Viet Cong would actually go out of its way to keep from encountering the Black Horse because they were afraid of them.
Talk about, I remember you told me a story about some games that you played with the Viet Cong using the radio networks.
Yeah, on the radio, every morning at 6 o'clock, I think a lot of people have probably seen Good Morning Vietnam, where they come on and they say, Good Morning Vietnam.
And 6 o'clock in the morning when it would come on, by hook or crook, someone would set up with Armed Forces Radio that if they would play Nowhere to Run, Nowhere to Hide,
at 6 o'clock, then the Viet Cong knew they were in real trouble because the black horse was coming to get them.
And so it made our day a lot easier.
And so when they heard that and they knew the black horse was in the area, they pretty much stayed clear of us.
Lieutenant Colonel Hester has so many stories from his tours of Vietnam.
The one I want you to talk about now involves meeting up with an actually North Vietnamese Army troop, and it also involved a pallet of beer.
Tell that story.
Well, one of the things that Colonel Patton did for us, he made sure we got a hot meal in the afternoon for the most part.
And we got a pallet of beer a week, and it would fly out wherever we were at, and we'd get us a pallet of beer.
And this particular morning, we had come in the night before and had bivouacked in a dry rice paddy.
And over to our, approximately our one o'clock was a large tree area, a forest area.
And we really didn't have time to recon.
We set up and the next morning, a Air Force bird dog or scout plane flew over and radioed us that he had seen some activity down in that forest area and made us aware of it.
We were going to go out and recon, see what we could find.
And just as we were leaving, a helicopter come flying in with an iron pallet of air.
And so as they came fairly close and began to lure it, to drop it, the North Vietnamese regular army, not Viet Cong, came out of this forest area.
I don't know if they thought it was food or rationing or whatever.
Supplies of some sort.
Supplies.
They came out to get it and we weren't going to have any part of it.
They weren't going to take our beer and we didn't want that.
Unfortunately, they got on the short end of the stick, they did.
Right, right.
And the battle ensued, right?
Battle ensued.
And when it did, they had some RPG teams or rocket propel teams, small arm fire, some mortars.
And so as they came out to meet us, of course, we went in to meet them.
and the tank commander that I was next to, he got hurt, and he left the tank, and I took his place.
Now, the tank commander sits on top of the tank in the cupola, and he's kind of the one that controls who does what and who they shoot at and so forth.
The tank immediately to the left of me took a couple RPG rounds and kind of burst into flames.
What I did is, and the ground forces were coming towards us,
I maneuvered my tank around into the front of it.
We got off, and we took these wounded soldiers off that burning tank and got them off the back so that somebody could take care of them.
I immediately got back on my vehicle, which by then had also taken some RPG rounds.
My gunner and driver were injured, and I...
pulled them from the turret and got them on the back and then I mounted the cupolo, the turret and opened 50 caliber fire on my coax or 7.62 machine gun was disabled.
When I emptied the 50 caliber, I dismounted, picked up a couple of M16s and had a ground effect.
And for this, you were awarded the Silver Star.
This was August 5th, 1968.
I'd like to, Lieutenant Colonel Hester has described it.
I'd like to,
Read how it's described in the actual commendation, General Order Number 1468.
Specialist Hester mounted the burning tank, entered the turret, and pulled the injured gunner to safety and administered first aid.
With complete disregard for his own safety, Specialist Hester remounted the burning tank and, using the .50 caliber machine gun, directed fire toward oncoming Viet Cong infantrymen.
Specialist Hester upon exhausting the 50 caliber ammunition dismounted the burning vehicle and took up an M16 and directed small arms fire toward the Viet Cong until reinforcements could arrive.
Specialist Hester was officially credited with 21 Viet Cong killed, 16 Viet Cong wounded.
Specialist Hester's display of courage and determination
was in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service and reflects great credit upon himself and the United States Army."
This is something when you receive this, and of course, the star, which we'll see in a minute, is something that obviously you're very proud of the way that you reacted under a very, very critical situation.
I am.
Indeed, N.R.
And to hear it again, I can tell that it still comes back to you.
Let's move on.
But I do want you to describe, because it was very interesting going back to sort of this fight, there was a big difference between Viet Cong and regular North Vietnamese Army in the way they fought and the sophistication of how they fought.
Oh, the North Vietnamese regular army were actual hardcore professional soldiers, just like America, British, or whoever.
A lot of them were Russian or Chinese trained and they had the better weapons and they had the tactics and they had the command system.
And so they had NCOs that could actually function and lead troops.
Well, the Viet Cong, although they were effective in what they did, to me they were more like a militia.
They were bands of roaming soldiers or militiamen who would come in and once they ensued into a firefight, a lot of times they would just burst and run because they really did not have a true command structure, at least what I dealt with anyway.
So when you encountered a North Vietnamese regular, whether they were a squad, platoon or battalion, you had professional soldiers.
You were, I guess, officially wounded three times, really officially wounded twice, for which you earned two Purple Hearts.
Go through those.
Talk about your... When we got to Vietnam in 68, we landed at Cameron Bay.
And by hook or crook, we got on the wrong airplane and ended up in Way.
Well, while they were trying to decide what to do with us in this replacement center, on January 31st, we were coming back from the NCO club.
And the Tet Offensive started.
And our Repo Depot was right at the end of a mountain or cliff.
And on top of the mountain was a radio station or antenna, which apparently was of some strategic value to everybody.
And the Viet Cong began to lob off mortars, hand grenades, small arm fire.
They had infiltrated in the way into the barracks from setting satchel charges and put the fuel dumps to fire and so forth.
And as we were scurrying around trying to decide where we could get a weapon of some sort, apparently I was hit in the chest by a bullet.
Apparently it come from a long way because it really didn't go that deep.
And so the next morning when things were a little bit more organized, someone had pointed out to me that I had blood all over my shirt.
So we went down the road to an aid station.
And when I walked in, there was this crusty old army major that I said, I think I've been
hurt major, and she said, well, let me see.
And she looks up at my chest and she reaches in there with her fingers and pulls this bullet out and gives it to me and throws a bandaid on me and says, get out of my aid station.
You're not hurt, soldier.
So I missed out on that one.
I didn't get my reward for that.
She didn't want to mess around with the paperwork.
No, I was not really hurt, according to her, and I probably wasn't.
Your one Purple Heart that you earned in particular, you got pretty bunged up.
It was an exploding gas tank.
Well, actually the first one was we were in base camp and I had gone back to, we had some new recruits that came in and I was in base camp and it was raining that night and lights were out at 2200.
And so I was in the orderly room and I had just laid down and I heard off in the distance a thud.
And I waited and I heard it hit on the other end of the base camp.
So I immediately got up and ran out and started getting all of these young guys up that you really didn't know what was going on into a bunker.
And so that they'd be better protected.
And as I did, a 122 millimeter rocket exploded in the trees above us.
I got hit in the back shrapnel, knocked to the ground.
When I recovered my senses, I got up and made sure all those guys were safe.
And when I got to the bunker,
which overlooked the berm.
One of the soldiers had been hurt.
He had been outside when it started.
I put him in a jeep and drove him up about 25 or 30 yards to the aid station and we did a little patchwork on him and I went back to the bunker and by then the new recruits had
had come to the bunker and so we set up guard all night long in the bunker just in case there was a ground attack.
And the next morning I went up to the aid station and had them put some bandages on where my shrapnel wounds had been and I got my first Purple Heart.
The second one though was a little more serious.
Right, after this encounter where the Silver Star was one, about two or three weeks after that, we were on a road march and we had stopped.
They had command detonated mines.
They would usually take out the first vehicle, the middle one, and then the last one.
And on these roads, you really didn't have a lot of room to maneuver.
Unfortunately, I happened to be one of the two in the middle, and we were standing outside, and one of them, the tank in front of us, or actually between us, was a bomb that exploded as a booby trap.
And when it did, the gasoline engines caught on fire, the gasoline, and I was blown up.
And I spent several months in Japan in one of the hospitals over there for that.
What were your injuries?
I actually had an eardrum that was blown out.
Both of my femurs were fractured.
My arm was dislocated.
My eye had actually been slightly evolved from its socket.
I had a broken jaw in a couple of three places.
And I think I also had an ankle that was broken.
My goodness.
We're going to go back to more of this story in a minute, but I want to take a look at some of the photographs that Lieutenant Colonel Hester has supplied to us, and we can go to the first one.
There you are right there.
That's the young and impressionable young Jimmy Hester.
That was basic training in Fort Polk.
Had no idea maybe what you were in for.
There you are.
Good looking young man.
We're going to fast forward quite a bit with the pictures here.
As a matter of fact, they're not in a particular special order, but this is you and your wife, Jenny.
We'll go to this one.
There you go.
When was that picture taken?
It was taken in 2001 in December.
We had a Christmas ball at Fort Sam Houston that we were attending.
You're proud of it.
These pictures hang on Jenny and Jim's wall at their home and Brian.
Going to move on to another photograph right here.
This is, you have three sons.
I do.
And this is the one who chose the military path.
Talk about him, what he's doing, and what he's about to do.
He is a Navy chief.
He's a first class E6.
He is a beach master.
And I'm very proud of that picture.
We finally got together and had him done.
And he now is in Norfolk, Virginia at Little Creek.
And he is about to deploy on his third tour of Iraq in November.
And he's already been to Iraq twice?
Twice.
And what was his job there?
He's been a beach master all three times.
A beach master there.
Yes, sir.
And a beach master does exactly what?
A beach master is actually, they call them mini-seals, but what they do is they go on a beach and they secure it.
And so once it's secured, then they're the ones that actually allow the equipment and men to be brought in off the ships.
And they are actually traffic controllers.
They decide where it's going to go, where it's going to be put.
And then after that's done,
then they leave because usually the Marines or whoever has secured the beach, once that's done, when they begin to come back, they reappear on the beach again, and they make sure all the equipment is loaded in whatever order, and then they're the last ones off the beach.
So they secure the beach until they're off of it.
So he's got a pretty hazardous job.
Last thing I want to look at is your shadow box with your awards.
And sort of go over these with us.
I think everybody knows what this one is here.
This is one of your two Purple Hearts here.
And the one in the top middle, I think that's your Silver Star.
Talk about these awards.
Let's go top left.
What are we looking at?
Okay, the middle one, of course, is the Silver Star.
The one to the left, the red and green, is the Bronze Star.
And the one to the right is the Army Combination Medal for valor.
And the one below it is the National Defense.
And the other one is actually a good conduct medal, which we call the John Wayne Medal.
Did you always earn that good conduct medal?
Well, I did the first one.
The rest of them, I'm not sure exactly how I got them, but I had two or three of those before it was over with.
And then the one to the right, the purple one, is, of course, the Purple Heart, one of them.
Right.
And the two down below it, the green and white, is the Vietnam campaign in-service, in-country ribbon.
And then the one to the left, the yellow and green, is the actual Vietnam service medal.
Certainly all symbols of bravery that all soldiers are proud to wear.
And I know that you're very proud of these.
You also might notice in the shot of Lieutenant Colonel Hester that we're using today back behind him is his uniform from Vietnam and a rack of ribbons there.
You were certainly decorated, but I know that that's probably not singly the thing that's most important to you, but just the memory of your service and what you were able to accomplish and all of your comrades were able to accomplish in that war that still to this day is not an understood war.
It's true.
It never has been.
It probably never will be.
But those of us that were there, we did what we had to do.
And when we did, some came back and it was something they would prefer not to have, which I don't think really of us wanted to be over there.
But when you go in, that's your duty.
That's what you get paid for and that's your job.
And I was a professional and that's what was my job.
Summer of 1968, you finished your permanent tour.
But then...
It's sort of a second segment of your military life begins then because you get interested in becoming a nurse.
Talk a little bit about how that all evolved.
Right before I got injured, the orderly room clerk came up one day and says, hey, you know, the Army's looking for nurses.
They want medics.
They want to send them to nursing school.
Why don't you go ahead and apply?
You know, you stay nice and warm and clean and you don't have to put up with this.
So I did.
And as it usually goes, you'll put in for something and it'll never happen or they give you the opposite.
Well, after I was hurt, sent to Japan, I came back to Fort Sam Houston for convalescent leave.
And my actual enlistment was about to be up in about six months.
And so this recruiter came up to him and says, Hester, you know, he says, I've got a piece of paper here that says you apply to go to nursing school.
And I said, that's right.
He says, well, you know,
you're going to have to go before a medical board, and you might not be able to stay in the Army.
He said, but I'll tell you what.
He said, if you'll sign on this dotted line, he says, I'll get credit for your recruitment, and we'll get you in nursing school, and you can worry about that board later.
I thought, fine, because I wanted to stay in, and so I did.
And so in March or April of 69, I was released to convalescent leave school in Fort Sam Houston.
where I went to school in Corpus Christi.
Right.
And that's where I stayed for the next three years in nursing school.
But then you got a little bit of a surprise a little bit later on because this test, this physical test that you were going to have to take came along a little quicker than you expected.
It did.
I was right into my, going into my senior year in nursing school and I got a letter from the medical board at Fort Sam and they wanted me to appear before them because somehow or another my paperwork had been slow in getting there and they wanted to make sure that I was going to be fit to continue on to school.
So I went
And by hook or crook, we talked about things.
And they said, well, if you can pass the army physical fitness test or a physical fitness test, then we'll allow you to be retained and you can finish your school.
However, I can't guarantee you that you'll be in the army nurse corps because right now we're putting these people in a military pool.
And we'll talk about that a little later.
And so I went back and I used to visit the NCO club, the chief's club out at the base.
And I was out there one night crying in my beer and
about this and an old Marine, several Marines that I had met in Vietnam came up and says, you know, what's the problem?
So I tell them, you'd be out here Saturday morning with your PT clothes on and we'll get your PT test.
So I did.
Well, PT test considered of some volleyball, some softball, and then, of course, happy hour after it was all over with.
And so my Marine Corps physical fitness test was signed by a Marine gunny and signed by a first lieutenant in the Marine Corps.
And so when I presented this back to the board, they were in awe.
They just were not sure that exactly
why or how I could have passed a Marine Corps physical fitness test, which was considerably harder at that time, which probably still is in the armies.
And so I got to stay in.
And you got to stay in.
I got to stay in.
And somebody helped you along, but that was good.
Absolutely, they did.
Went to aerospace school, learned to be a flight nurse, went to Fort Scott for the training, and then...
Pretty fascinating what you do after that.
Talk about the air back situation and what you did there, other than you did a whole lot of flying.
Well, once we get out of airspace school or nurse flight school at Brooke in San Antonio, we got assigned to Scott Air Force Base in Illinois, and that was the MAC, or where all the air back went.
Basically, our flight went from Scott to Fort Dix or Maguire and over to Germany and then back to Guam, Japan.
From Guam, they usually flew into Vietnam to pick up wounded and so forth.
And, of course, we always managed to stay there at least 24 hours so that we could get our pay without any taxes.
We'd fly back to Guam, then to Hawaii Tripler.
And from Tripler, we'd fly into Wolford Hall in San Antonio and then back to Scott.
And you'd pick up folks, you'd mend folks, you'd fix folks.
This was just a constant tour of doing this kind of thing.
Right.
It was an air ambulance is what it was.
We'd pick up the wounded.
And actually, on these aircraft, we had our little ICU.
We had a little emergency room.
We had a lot of walking wounded that were just looking for a way back.
Sometimes we would pick up people, say, for instance, who had been in Hawaii, who actually lived in California.
We would fly them back there so they could be closest to home to the nearest military hospital.
You went back into the Army, out of the Air Force.
You spent 10 years as an instructor at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, and then 9-11, 2001 came along, and you were asked to serve again.
Talk about that.
Well, I retired in April 2001, and 9-11 came along, and not too many weeks after that, I get a phone call from the Army Center up in St.
Louis, and they said, hey, we need
We're gonna bring you back on duty, but we're gonna put you in with a reserve group in San Antonio.
We got a field hospital that needs to be upgraded.
And so I said, fine.
And so from about October 2001 until actually May of 2003, I was one of the people in that field hospital that helped up train.
And then it stood down in September of 2003
and everything we had done had been packed and put by a real head, basically.
And they stood down, so I retired again and decided that's about all I wanted anymore.
And now, all those people that we had up-trained, many of them actually went over to our wreck and are there now in November, December, 2004.
I know there's a lot more to your story, and you want to say again, Lieutenant Colonel Hester, Army Commendation Medal for Valor, Silver Star, Bronze Star, Two Purple Hearts, and today you're still in the medical field.
You do a little commuting.
Talk about what you're doing right now.
We've got about a minute.
My professional is a registered nurse, and I work at Richards Memorial Hospital in Rockdale right now, where I work in the emergency room, which is actually my forte, my specialty up there.
And I commute a little bit every day, but it's a nice drive.
And it's a nice little hospital.
And I enjoy what I do there.
And so that's basically what I do right now.
It's a remarkable, remarkable story.
And we could go on and on.
But mainly, thank you for your service.
Thank you, Lieutenant Colonel Jim Hester.
Many young men and women gave their best years of their youth in Vietnam in the war.
Some came home, some didn't.
Lieutenant Colonel Jim Hester came home to tell his story, and it's our honor that he has shared it with us.
We thank Jim Hester for his service, and we thank all veterans, and thank you to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Amen.